post: server sent event (#83)
cloudx-labs/posts: posts/maxistahl/02.server-events.md

---
title: Backend to Frontend communication with Server-Sent Events
published: true
description: Server-Sent Events (SSE) is a technology that allows a web page to get updates from a server. In this article, I will show you how to use SSE to communicate between the backend and the frontend.
tags: 'node.js, server-sent events, backend, frontend, web development, javascript'
cover_image: ./assets/back-to-front/one-node-communication-to-another-node-graph-in-a-futurist-style.jpg
id: 1450041
---

Server-Sent Events (SSE) is a web technology that allows servers to send updates asynchronously to clients in real time. This means that the server can send data to clients without them having to constantly request it. This is a good way to avoid polling the server for updates.

## Server-Sent Events at high level

> SSE is a way for a web page to receive automatic updates from a server via HTTP connection. It is a one-way communication from the server to the client. This means that the client can only receive data from the server, but it cannot send data to the server. This is the main difference between SSE and WebSockets (WebSockets is a two-way communication between the client and the server).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SSE is a way for a web page to receive automatic updates from a server via a HTTP connection. It is a one-way communication from the server to the client. This means that the client can only receive data from the server, but it cannot send data to the server. This is the main difference between SSE and WebSockets (WebSockets is a two-way communication between the client and the server).
```

### When to use Server-Sent Events?

A common use case for Server-Sent Events is to display real-time updates on a website. For example: 
* a delivery tracking website could use SSE to display real-time updates on the status of a delivery.
* It could also be used to display real-time updates (in an online game maybe? :D)
* to display updates from a news website.

## How does it work?

The client opens an HTTP connection to the server and the server sends data to the client via this connection. The client can receive data from the server as long as the connection is open. When the connection is closed, the client stops receiving data from the server.

![Server to client infographic](assets/back-to-front/client-server.jpg)

> One of the main advantages of SSE is that it is very easy to implement. You don't need to install any additional libraries or frameworks. You can use SSE with any programming language and any web framework.

## How to implement Server-Sent Events in Node.js

I will show you how to implement SSE in Node.js and plain Javascript. Hold on tight, it's going to be fast!

### Backend (Our node.js server)

> ``` javascript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```javascript
```

const http = require('http');

http.createServer((req, res) => {
  // Set the response headers
  res.writeHead(200, {
    'Content-Type': 'text/event-stream',
    'Cache-Control': 'no-cache',
    'Connection': 'keep-alive',
    'Access-Control-Allow-Origin': '*'
  });

  // Send a message to the client every 5 seconds
  setInterval(() => {
    res.write('data: ' + new Date().toLocaleTimeString() + '\n\n');
  }, 5000);
}).listen(3000);

```

In this example, we create an HTTP server that sends a message to the client every 5 seconds using the setInterval() function. The message includes the current time using the toLocaleTimeString() function. It is important that we set the response headers in this way so that the client can correctly process the data.

### Frontend (Our client)

``` javascript

const eventSource = new EventSource('http://localhost:3000');

eventSource.onmessage = (event) => {
  console.log(event.data);
};

```

> Here, we create an EventSource object on the client side and pass it the URL of the server that is sending the events. Then we add an onmessage event handler that is executed every time the server sends an event. In this example, we simply print the event data to the browser's console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we create an `EventSource` object on the client side and pass it the URL of the server that is sending the events. Then we add an `onmessage` event handler that is executed every time the server sends an event. In this example, we simply print the event data to the browser's console.
```

tags: 'node.js, server-sent events, backend, frontend, web development, javascript'
cover_image: ./assets/back-to-front/one-node-communication-to-another-node-graph-in-a-futurist-style.jpg
id: 1450041
---

Server-Sent Events (SSE) is a web technology that allows servers to send updates asynchronously to clients in real time. This means that the server can send data to clients without them having to constantly request it. This is a good way to avoid polling the server for updates.

## Server-Sent Events at high level

SSE is a way for a web page to receive automatic updates from a server via a HTTP connection. It is a one-way communication from the server to the client. This means that the client can only receive data from the server, but it cannot send data to the server. This is the main difference between SSE and WebSockets (WebSockets is a two-way communication between the client and the server).

### When to use Server-Sent Events?

A common use case for Server-Sent Events is to display real-time updates on a website. For example:

* a delivery tracking website could use SSE to display real-time updates on the status of a delivery.

> * It could also be used to display real-time updates (in an online game maybe? :D)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* to display real-time updates (in an online game maybe? :D)
```

* to display updates from a news website.

## How does it work?

> The client opens an HTTP connection to the server and the server sends data to the client via this connection. The client can receive data from the server as long as the connection is open. When the connection is closed, the client stops receiving data from the server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The client opens an HTTP connection to the server and this sends data to the client via this connection. The client can receive data from the server as long as the connection is open. When the connection is closed, the client stops receiving data from the server.
```

![Server to client infographic](assets/back-to-front/client-server.jpg)

> One of the main advantages of SSE is that it is very easy to implement. You don't need to install any additional libraries or frameworks. You can use SSE with any programming language and any web framework.

## How to implement Server-Sent Events in Node.js

> I will show you how to implement SSE in Node.js and plain Javascript. Hold on tight, it's going to be fast!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I will show you how to implement SSE in Node.js using plain Javascript. Hold on tight, it's going to be fast!
```
I think another option could be _with Node.js and plain Javascript_

### Backend (Our node.js server)

```javascript

const http = require('http');

http.createServer((req, res) => {
  // Set the response headers
  res.writeHead(200, {
    'Content-Type': 'text/event-stream',
    'Cache-Control': 'no-cache',
    'Connection': 'keep-alive',
    'Access-Control-Allow-Origin': '*'
  });

  // Send a message to the client every 5 seconds

>   setInterval(() => {

Author: I got your point. The purpose of this example was to have a clear implementation in the most simple way just show the backend sending events with out the noise of any other implementation. I wanted to show the simplicity of the implementation and avoid in the example to use code that doesn't affect the implementation of SSE. do you think that I need to reinforce the code anyway? Or maybe, just clarify in some place that the example is a lightweight implementation?

>   setInterval(() => {

Author: I ran several test and I decided to add a `clearInterval` to improve the code quality

    res.write('data: ' + new Date().toLocaleTimeString() + '\n\n');
  }, 5000);
}).listen(3000);

```

> In this example, we create an HTTP server that sends a message to the client every 5 seconds using the `setInterval()` function. The message includes the current time using the `toLocaleTimeString()` function. It is important that we set the response headers in this way so that the client can correctly process the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, we create an HTTP server that sends a message to the client every 5 seconds using the `setInterval()` function. The message includes the current time using the `toLocaleTimeString()` function. It is important to set the response headers in this way so the client can correctly process the data.
```

### Frontend (Our client)

```javascript

const eventSource = new EventSource('http://localhost:3000');

eventSource.onmessage = (event) => {
  console.log(event.data);
};

```

> Here, we create an `EventSource` object on the client side and pass it the URL of the server that is sending the events. Then we add an `onmessage` event handler that is executed every time the server sends an event. In this example, we simply print the event data to the browser's console.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here we created an `EventSource` object on the client side and passed the server URL that is sending the events to it. After that we added an `onmessage` event handler that is executed every time the server sends an event. In this example, we simply print the event data to the browser's console.
```

I only think it seems better in past since you've already shown the code

## Conclusion

> Pretty easy, right? It is very simple to implement and it works with any programming language and any web framework. I hope this is helpful to you. If you have any questions or comments, please leave them in the comments section below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pretty easy, right? It is very simple to implement and it works with any programming language and any web framework. I hope this is helpful to you. If you have any questions or comments, please leave them below.
```

---
title: Backend to Frontend communication with Server-Sent Events
published: true
description: Server-Sent Events (SSE) is a technology that allows a web page to get updates from a server. In this article, I will show you how to use SSE to communicate between the backend and the frontend.

> tags: 'node.js, server-sent events, backend, frontend, web development, javascript'

Reviewer 3: AFAIK you can only include 4 tags, and the format doesn't allow dots or spaces I believe.
